#summary BibApp Project Roadmap

*TODO*: Expand this page.

==Version 1.0 - Requirements==

  * Authentication and Authorization
  * Citations
    * Citation ingest
    * Citation reuse
  * Time

===Authentication and Authorization===


=====Description=====

The BibApp needs have a simple and straightforward Authorization system, which can provide many different levels of access to data within the system.  In addition, it needs a very dynamic authentication system, which can be easily extended for local authentication mechanisms.  However, it also needs to support a variety of common authentication mechanisms out-of-the-box.   More detailed information can be found on the AuthenticationAuthorization page.

   * Goals:
     # Simple Authorization
       * Preferable to use an existing Rails plugin or Ruby gem
       * Authorization "roles" will be assigned to "users"
       * Should follow a basic "sentence-like" structure: "[[user]] has [[role]] on [[object]]"
     # Simple, but Dynamic Authentication
       * Preferable to use an existing Rails plugin or Ruby gem
       * Cannot assume any particular local authentication mechanism - Configurable & Extendable!
       * Out-of-the-box, BibApp should minimally support basic HTTP authentication (with an encrypted password in the database).  Should be easily extendable/configurable to support other authentication mechanisms.

          
===Citations===

Read the [CitationModelRefactor] page to better understand the re-architecture for version 1.0.

====Citation ingest====

  * Goals:
    # Simple workflow for adding citations
    # Support for many citation types: Journal Article, Books, etc.
    # Support for common standards
    # Automated de-duplication
  * Success criteria:
    # One
    # Two
    # Three

=====Description=====

To be successful, the BibApp needs to be a robust citation repository first and foremost.  We need to ensure data ingest remains simple and intuitive, lowing the bar for participation and administration.


====Citation reuse====

  * Goals:
    # Goal 1
  * Success criteria:
    # Example

===Time===

==Version 2.0 - Suggested Features==

  * Interoperability
  * More SHERPA
  * Focus on current campus collaboration
  * Authorities
    * Author names
    * Journals / Sources
    * Publishers
  * Cited references?