=2007.09 - BibApp - UIUC and UW-Madison=

===Summary of meeting===

UW and UIUC participants discussed current installations and visions for BibApp. UW Madison shared the results of their focus groups. As a result of these discussions, the participants decided that BibApp development should focus initially on a Version 1 that is a robust, scalable 'citation repository' (see more details below). Version 2 will potentially build on this repository by providing data analysis tools and other services.

The group felt that BibApp 1.0 (version 1) should be funded mostly by internal reallocation in order to illustrate institutional commitment and to be sure that we had a robust prototype to show to funding agencies. In order to get a realistic sense of the resources needed for a BibApp 1.0, a small group (Larson, Vack, Donohue, Cordial, Shreeves, Salo) will be assessing the requirements and changes needed. The group will then be able to take some definitive resource needs to their administrations.

Key funding agencies for a BibApp 2.0 (version 2) were identified as Mellon and IMLS.

Technical details in terms of requirements and changes needed were discussed on the second day of the meeting. A conference call will be scheduled in the near future to discuss these and the resources needed for BibApp 1.0.

The group felt that the meeting was productive and energizing. We are hopeful that a strong and useful collaboration can come of this work!

===Participants===

|| Participant || Title || Institution ||
|| Deborah Helman || Director, Wendt Library || UW-Madison ||
|| Eric Larson || Digital Services Librarian, Wendt Library || UW-Madison ||
|| Nathan Vack || Head of Computer Systems, Wendt Library || UW-Madison ||
|| Dorothea Salo || MINDS@UW Librarian || UW-System ||
|| Sarah Shreeves || IDEALS Coordinator || UIUC ||
|| Tim Donohue || IDEALS Research Programmer || UIUC ||
|| Matt Cordial || Research Programmer, IDEALS / Grainger Library || UIUC ||
|| Bill Mischo || Director, Grainger Library || UIUC ||
|| Tom Habing || Research Programmer, Grainger Library || UIUC ||
|| Beth Sandore || Assoc. University Librarian for IT || UIUC ||
|| Mike Grady || Senior Technology Architect, CITES || UIUC ||
|| Ben Moseley || IDEALS Grad hourly, CITES || UIUC ||

===Agenda===

====Thursday Sept 20th (Vision, administration, funding)====

  * 12:00 - 1:30 Lunch, Wisconsin and UIUC
  * 01:30 - 2:00 Introductions and Overview of meeting
  * 02:00 - 3:00 History of BibApp, Where we are, and feedback from user testing at Wisconsin (Wisconsin / Illinois)
  * 03:00 - 3:30 break
  * 03:30 - 4:00 Vision for future of BibApp - where we think it should go based on our experience and user feedback at Wisconsin (broad strokes)
  * 04:00 - 5:00 Where we need to go next administratively (agreements between the campuses?) and for funding
  * 06:00 - Dinner

====Friday Sept 21st (Programming and pragmatics)====

  * 09:00-10:30 Based on vision outlined above what are the next steps for the program itself
  * 10:30-11:00 Break
  * 11:00-12:00 Next steps (action items for each group)

===Thursday - Vision, administration, funding===

====History of BibApp====

=====UW-Madison=====

  * Began as pilot for the College of Engineering
    * Recruit content for the Institutional Repository (MINDS@UW)
    * Analyze retention of faculty copyright
  * Adopted by UW-Madison Libraries' Office of Scholarly Communication and Publishing as a "campus" project
  * Awarded a $10,000 Brittingham grant
    * Objective 1: Pursue expansion at UW-Madison to School of Medicine and a Humanities department
    * Objective 2: Obtain end-user feedback from faculty, researchers and administrators to position the application for success
  * Archived 1,412 peer-reviewed IEEE and AIP papers in MINDS@UW

=====UIUC=====

  * BibApp install with two departments
    * Speech Communications
    * History (have archived about 13 papers from History in IDEALS using BibApp)
  * Interested in IR population
  * Long-term possibilities
    * Collaboration
    * Collection development: distribution of money, data-driven discussions / decisions
    * Analysis of current scholarly publishing activities as well as historical trends.
    * Analysis of formal and informal interdisciplinary activities occurring on campus
  * Parallel to "Summary of Engineering Research" project
    * Annual review and research report for UIUC's CoE
    * Produced in collaboration with CoE publications office
    * Glossy for distribution

====Feedback from user testing====

The UW-Madison Libraries conducted focus groups and interviews with 17 faculty, administrators and staff during the summer of 2007.

=====Research Sharing=====

 Faculty webpages are out of date, reflects poorly on the individual and the institution.  Online publication lists are important for many reasons: recruiting new faculty, graduate students, and grant applications.  Keeping their own lists up to date takes too much time.  If the library can help, faculty will support and assist the effort--forwarding CVs, annual reports, etc.

=====Expert Discovery=====

 Locating collaborators is very difficult.  "People" issues present the most trouble: Do I like this person?, Do they share my vision for the project?, Do they have time to partner?  The BibApp *might* help locate collaborators, but using online resources cannot beat word of mouth--unanimously agreed to be the best method for locating collaborators.

=====Screenshot Reactions=====

 Currency is the most important factor.  "Who I'm Publishing With", "Keywords", "Recent Publications"... all these things indicate who a researcher has been, but do not illustrate who the researcher is *today*.  Researchers need to tailor their profile to indicate who they work with now, what they currently research.

=====Archiving=====

 Faculty are not interested, but if the library can help do this, "that's probably the right thing to do..."

====Vision for BibApp's future====

In general, the group decided that we need to focus first on building a scalable, robust version 1 whose main purpose was a citation repository. The highest priorities were scalability, ease of ingest, ease of export, and authentication / authorization. The group felt that Wisconsin and UIUC should try to build version 1 using internal resources, and then pursue funding for a version 2 which would probably focus on data analysis tools (but would need more focus groups / discussion before committing on a direction for version 2).

=====Funding=====

  * External
    * Mellon and IMLS
    * Mellon likes a strong connection to faculty
    * Everyone is interested in the changing nature of scholarly communication
    * Understanding publishing practices
  * Locally
    * Where is the funding?

=====Similar Projects=====

  * Citation Managers
    * [http://www.zotero.org/ Zotero]
    * [http://www.refworks.com/ RefWorks]
  * Faculty Publication Databases
    * [http://vivo.cornell.edu/ Cornell's VIVO]
    * [https://pro.osu.edu/ Ohio State's OSU:pro]
  * Literature review
    * Blummer B. (2007) The Availability of Faculty Publication Databases from Library Web Pages. Journal of Web Librarianship, 1(2), 27-55.

=====Version 1.0 - Requirements=====

  * Authentication and Authorization
  * Citation ingest
  * Citation reuse
  * Time

=====Version 2.0 - Suggestions=====

  * Interoperability
  * More SHERPA
  * Focus on current campus collaboration
  * Authorities
    * Author names
    * Journals / Sources
    * Publishers
  * Cited references?

====Administrative Todos====

  * Next Steps
    * Scope for Version 1.0
    * Time commitment and timeline
    * Funding sources

===Friday - Programming and pragmatics===

Friday's discussion was highly technical.  The group talked mainly about refactoring the Citation model and adding Roles and Permissions to the application.

====Programming====

=====Citation model=====

  * Goal: Develop a robust "citation repository"
    * Highest priority
    * "Keel" of the application

=====DB architecture=====

Table name (previous name)

  * Users (People)
  * Authors
  * Authorships
  * Citations
    * Citation Types (Reftypes)
    * Citation States
    * Citation Archive States (Archive Statuses)
  * Groups
  * Memberships
  * Roles
  * Permissions
  * Tags
  * Taggings
  * Keywords
  * Keywordings
  * Publishers
  * Publications

=====Changes=====

  # The old People table needs to be split into two: Users and Authors.  Users authenticate, are authorized to "claim" an Author record.
  # Difference between user "tags" and A&I "keywords".  We need to capture both: keywords for librarians (non-public), tags for users (public).
  # Lookup tables should be renamed for uniformity -- EL 2007.09.25
  # Roles need to be identified - Action Item
  # Permissions need to be stored -- EL 2007.09.25
  # Publisher and Publication data should be extracted as a RESTful application--allowing UIUC, UW-Madison and any potential partner access to a central database -- EL 2007.09.27

=====Authorization=====

  * Both institutions need to actively engage this requirement
  * Cannot be specific to institution

=====Interface=====

  * Full De-Madisonize the application 
  * HTML, CSS can be completely reworked (BM)
  * Installation ease, documentation and dependencies removed (BM)

=====Timeframe?=====

  * Too hard to tell
  * Conference call in two weeks

====Next Steps====

  # Requirements list on Google Code (EL)
  # Time commitment estimation (All)
  # Conference call in two weeks (Sarah)